blog: OpenLineage for Streaming Jobs (#3318)
OpenLineage/OpenLineage: website/blog/streaming-philosophy/index.mdx

---
title: OpenLineage for Streaming Jobs
date: 2024-12-13
authors: [Obuchowski]
description: A deep dive onto how OpenLineage thinks about streaming jobs.
---

## OpenLineage for Streaming Jobs

> Despite  appearing to fit mostly batch processing jobs, OpenLineage provides comprehensive lineage tracking for both batch and streaming job models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite appearing to fit mostly batch processing jobs, OpenLineage provides comprehensive lineage tracking for both batch and streaming job models.
```
Double space

In fact, the streaming model can be seen as an extension of the batch model and works effectively with systems like Apache Flink or Apache Spark.

> However, there are some core differences between how those jobs are typically executed, and OpenLineage integration has to take into account those major differences.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, there are some core differences between how those jobs are typically executed, and OpenLineage integration has to take into account those differences.
```

Such visibility is necessary for diagnosing issues and assessing impacts, such as identifying the root cause of delayed data processing.

### When Are Datasets Updated?
Only at the start or end of a job?
Dataset versioning is critical for tasks like debugging and ensuring data freshness. OpenLineage handles dataset updates for batch jobs using two mechanisms:
 - Implicit versioning: The “last update timestamp” corresponds to the end of a run modifying the dataset.
 - Explicit versioning: The DatasetVersionDatasetFacet allows events to provide explicit version details for datasets being read or written.
However, explicit versioning is currently provided only by new “table formats” like Apache Iceberg or Delta Lake, as most systems lack native versioning support in their data storage schemes.
For streaming jobs, OpenLineage offers additional capabilities, as OpenLineage’s RUNNING event type captures information that's available during job execution.
This is particularly evident in OpenLineage's Flink integration, where events are emitted continuously at configurable intervals, including details about completed Flink checkpoints.

> Unfortunately some integrations, like Apache Spark one, do not provide detailed updates while the job is still running.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, some frameworks
 such as Apache Spark, do not provide detailed updates while the job is still running.
```
